New input proposal (and some other proposal fixes I need to do) (#794)
dotnet/Silk.NET: documentation/proposals/Proposal - Multi-Backend Input.md

- [ ] Implemented

# Design Decisions
- This proposal, while aiming to keep the same look and feel as the 2.0 API, is a complete redesign of the Input API with the following goals:
    - Input backends can be added and removed at will to a central input context object.
    - All input devices, regardless of what backends they come from, can be accessed from a central input context object.
    - Should the Silk.NET team design more APIs for more devices (for example VR hands using OpenXR) in the future, this can be added in a non-breaking way.
    - All input devices instead of exposing properties only expose a single `State` property, with additional properties and/or methods for writable state (i.e. vibration motors, mouse position). This also addresses comments from the Working Group on previous iterations of this proposal, where the Working Group expressed interest in the state being immutable and trivially capturable.
    - Ensuring the input API is accessible and easy to use.

>     - Addressing APIs that the userbase frequently had issues/distaste with. For example, events are no longer on each individual device, rather they are aggregated in a list and accessed from a single entry-point.

Reviewer: I like this for devices like `IMouse` and `IKeyboard`, which I don't think you could ever have two of, but what about 'IGamepad' or 'IJoystick'? You can connect two gamepads to a single PC for a locally-multiplayer game, does it make sense to keep the events for all unified on these too?

Author: Yeah, but with all of the events you have a "sender" as the first argument telling you which IDevice caused the event to happen

}
```

The `CreateInputBackend` will create an instance of the reference implementation for the given `WindowHandles`. The `IWindowHandlesSource` overloads just forward to the `WindowHandles` overload. This is because `ISurface` will implement `IWindowHandlesSource`, so the extension methods will be usable on an `ISurface` without having a hard reference between Windowing and Input.

The `CreateInput` methods simply return an `InputContext` preconfigured with the backend created by `CreateInputBackend` for ease of use.

Please see the Windowing 3.0 proposal for `IWindowHandlesSource` and `WindowHandles`.

# Devices, Backends, and Contexts

Input devices all inherit from a root interface.

```cs
public interface IInputDevice
{
    nint Id { get; }
    string Name { get; }
}
```

`Id` is an globally-unique integral identifier for this device.

`Name` is a rough description of the input device. Its value is not intrinsically meaningful.

All devices originate from a context.

```cs
public interface IInputBackend
{
    string Name { get; }
    nint Id { get; }
    IReadOnlyList<IInputDevice> Devices { get; }
    void Update();

> }

Reviewer: Are we missing events (here or on `InputContext`) for device state changes?

Also, how would these be raised, the `InputContext` would check every update if there were any changes to the list?

}

public partial class Keyboards : IReadOnlyList<IKeyboard>
{
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IKeyboard, Key>>? KeyDown;
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IKeyboard, Key>>? KeyUp;
    public event Action<TextEvent<IKeyboard>>? TextInput;
}

public partial class Gamepads : IReadOnlyList<IGamepad>
{
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IGamepad, JoystickButton>>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IGamepad, JoystickButton>>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<IGamepad, Vector2>>? ThumbstickMove;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<IGamepad, float>>? TriggerMove;
}

public partial class Joysticks : IReadOnlyList<IJoystick>
{
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IJoystick, JoystickButton>>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<IJoystick, JoystickButton>>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<IJoystick, float>>? AxisMove;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<IJoystick, Vector2>>? HatMove;
}
```

Unlike 1.0 and 2.0, this proposal uses `readonly record struct`s as their only argument for the event action. This allows us to provide more information to the event handlers without breaking in the future. These types are farily simple:

```cs

> public readonly record struct ButtonEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice DeviceState, TButton Button);
> public readonly record struct ClickEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice DeviceState, TButton Button, Vector2 Position);
> public readonly record struct AxisEvent<TDevice, TAxis>(TDevice DeviceState, int Index, TAxis OldValue, TAxis NewValue);
> public readonly record struct TextEvent<TDevice>(TDevice DeviceState, string? OldText, string? NewText);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
public readonly record struct ButtonEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice sender, TButton button);
public readonly record struct ClickEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice sender, TButton button, Vector2 position);
public readonly record struct AxisEvent<TDevice, TAxis>(TDevice sender, int index, TAxis oldValue, TAxis newValue);
public readonly record struct TextEvent<TDevice>(TDevice sender, string? oldText, string? newText);
```

> Yeah, but with all of the events you have a "sender" as the first argument telling you which IWhatever caused the event to happen
Then these arguments should probably not be "state", but rather the device itself (also, argument names should start with lowercase)

Author: > Then these arguments should probably not be "state"

Good catch, left over from a previous revision.

> (also, argument names should start with lowercase)

Not for records, these map into the names of the properties/fields so unless you want to adopt Unity's nomenclature - no thanks!

```suggestion
public readonly record struct ButtonEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice Device, TButton Button);
public readonly record struct ClickEvent<TDevice, TButton>(TDevice Device, TButton Button, Vector2 Position);
public readonly record struct AxisEvent<TDevice, TAxis>(TDevice Device, int Index, TAxis OldValue, TAxis NewValue);
public readonly record struct TextEvent<TDevice>(TDevice Device, string? OldText, string? NewText);
```

{
    public InputReadOnlyList(IReadOnlyList<T> other);
}
```

The Silk.NET team wishes to reserve the right to add more constructors to this type as it sees fit.

This exists so that, should the Silk.NET choose to, we can optimize the lookup of elements while ensuring things like indexers are inlined and don't result in a virtual call if our implementation allows us to do so.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** For example, for joystick and mouse buttons we could use a fixed-sized bit buffer where each bit represents an individual button: 1 for pressed, 0 for unpressed. But for something like keyboard input where there are a large amount of keys, we can't do that and will likely use `Memory<T>` instead.

# Mouse Input

As discussed earlier, the interface will be very simple.

```cs
public interface IMouse : IInputDevice
{
    MouseState State { get; }
    ICursorConfiguration Cursor { get; }
    void SetPosition(Vector2 pos);
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`Cursor` contains the cursor configuration. This isn't actually state that the end user can change, and has been made an interface rather than a state struct accordingly.

> `SetPosition` allows moving the mouse cursor without the end user physically moving their mouse.

Reviewer: We should probably clarify that this won't (immediately) change `IMouse.State`, or at least not without an `Update()`

Author: Clarified.

```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorFlags
{
    None,
    Confined = 1 << 0
}
```

# Keyboard Input

Once again, the interface is very simple.

```cs
public interface IKeyboard : IInputDevice
{
    KeyboardState State { get; }
    void BeginInput();
    void EndInput();
    void SetClipboardText(string? clipboard);
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`BeginInput` starts recording textual input, bringing up the on-screen keyboard on platforms where this is needed (i.e. mobile). Unlike 2.0, this is now required given that textual input is now on a full-string basis rather than a per-char basis, and we don't want to record textual input unless the user asks us to.

For instance, instead of a `KeyChar` event being raised every time a character is pressed or repeated, a `TextInput` event is raised as the string is being built alleviating the need for developers to build the string themselves, given that the primary use of this event is for GUI input.

`SetClipboardText` allows setting the text on the user's clipboard so they can paste information from your application in others.

`KeyboardState` is defined as follows:

```cs
public readonly record struct KeyboardState
(

>     string? ClipboardText,

Reviewer: Does it make sense for the clipboard to be part of the keyboard state? I don't see the clipboard as something that belongs to the keyboard, plus if each time we want to update the keyboard's state we have to ask the backend for the clipboard's text that could potentially be a performance problem.

I can already see the issue "Performance drops after I copy this large text from wikipedia article"

Author: Excellent point, fixed.

- [ ] Implemented

# Design Decisions
- This proposal, while aiming to keep the same look and feel as the 2.0 API, is a complete redesign of the Input API with the following goals:
    - Input backends can be added and removed at will to a central input context object.
    - All input devices, regardless of what backends they come from, can be accessed from a central input context object.
    - Should the Silk.NET team design more APIs for more devices (for example VR hands using OpenXR) in the future, this can be added in a non-breaking way.
    - All input devices instead of exposing properties only expose a single `State` property, with additional properties and/or methods for writable state (i.e. vibration motors, mouse position). This also addresses comments from the Working Group on previous iterations of this proposal, where the Working Group expressed interest in the state being immutable and trivially capturable.
    - Ensuring the input API is accessible and easy to use (e.g. this is why later in the proposal we have made properties on the state structures that just forward to the underlying device object)

>     - Addressing APIs that the userbase frequently had issues/distaste with. For example, events are no longer on each individual 

Reviewer: > events are no longer on each individual
Is this phrase incomplete?

Author: ```suggestion
    - Addressing APIs that the userbase frequently had issues/distaste with. For example, events are no longer on each individual device, rather they are aggregated in a list and accessed from a single entry-point.
```

# Usage Examples
```cs
IWindowHandlesSource someWindow = null!;
var inputContext = someWindow.CreateInput();
inputContext.Gamepads.ThumbstickMove += @event =>
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Thumbstick {@event.Index} moved from {@event.OldValue} to {@event.NewValue}");
};
var isButtonDown = inputContext.Gamepads.Any(gamepadState => gamepadState.Buttons[JoystickButton.A]);
```
```cs
IWindowHandlesSource someWindow = null!;
var inputContext = new InputContext();
inputContext.Backends.Add(someWindow.CreateInputBackend());
// in future:
// inputContext.Backends.Add(new OpenXRInputBackend(...));
```

# Reference Implementation

Similar to Windowing 3.0, a reference implementation will be included in the main `Silk.NET.Input` package which uses the same API or family of APIs as Windowing's reference implementation. This will be exposed by the `InputWindowExtensions` class.

```cs
public static class InputWindowExtensions
{
    public static IInputBackend CreateInputBackend(this WindowHandles window);
    public static IInputBackend CreateInputBackend(this IWindowHandlesSource window);
    public static InputContext CreateInput(this WindowHandles window);

>     public static InputContext CreateInput(this IWindowHandlesSource window);

Reviewer 2: Not too sure this is a good idea - it makes things easier but I feel like it doesn't make logical sense.

Author: The Working Group in the last meeting expressed distaste with the idea of a source generator (the only real alternative) being core to the Silk.NET Windowing-Input integration. As such, this proposal opts to just use something in Silk.NET.Core.

The Windowing reference implementation uses the same API/family of APIs as the Input reference implementation (specified above).

Reviewer 2: I mean that this directly creates the context. This saves one line of code, and I feel it doesn't make too much sense that a window directly creates the full context.

Author: Oh right, this is for familiarity with 2.X and also just to improve readability of end user code. I don't think it does any harm, and users who don't care about multi-backend input probably won't want to look at it anyway.

}
```

> The `CreateInputBackend` will create an instance of the reference implementation for the given `WindowHandles`. The `IWindowHandlesSource` overloads just forward to the `WindowHandles` overload. This is because `ISurface` will implement `IWindowHandlesSource`, so the extension methods will be usable on an `ISurface` without having a hard reference between Windowing and Input.

Reviewer 2: (I can only mark the whole line)
I don't understand the reference to ISurface here, why is this relevant to this proposal?
imo IWindowHandlesSource / IWindowHandles should be re-defined in this proposal and no reference to ISurface is needed here.

Author: The Windowing proposal also uses these types - in any case we have a circular dependency, and of the Input and Windowing proposals, window-related types feel more at home in the latter.

The `CreateInput` methods simply return an `InputContext` preconfigured with the backend created by `CreateInputBackend` for ease of use.

Please see the Windowing 3.0 proposal for `IWindowHandlesSource` and `WindowHandles`.

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't exactly no where, but I think we should put an explicit comment somewhere that until in the below category "Update" on an input device is called, no events or any kind of state mutation will happen.
This requires us to do some buffering internally as some backends are push-based, but explicitly stating this makes it easier to understand the logic below.

# Devices, Backends, and Contexts

Input devices all inherit from a root interface.

```cs
public interface IInputDevice
{
    nint BackendId { get; }
    string Name { get; }
}
```

> `BackendId` is an integral identifier for this device unique to this backend **only** - i.e. it is not globally unique, and if you have an input context with multiple backends there may be multiple devices with a particular `BackendId`. It may be a handle to memory, or it may be a generic integral index - this is implementation-defined.

Reviewer 2: Can we also provide a global Id? in my book a GUID would make sense, as iirc we do not provide any guarantee the object reference stays the same either, so I feel providing a global ID (ie for storing what device the user selected or such?) would make sense.

Instead of a GUID the Input handle + device handle or something could also work (?)

Author: I suppose we could just make this globally unique, not a fan of GUIDs! Not specifying that this is a handle though, **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** because the way I'm picturing it now for devices that have an index instead of a handle will just do `backend handle + device index`

Author: ```suggestion
`Id` is an globally-unique integral identifier for this device.
```

`Name` is a rough description of the input device. Its value is not intrinsically meaningful.

All devices originate from a context.

```cs
public interface IInputBackend
{
    string Name { get; }
    nint Handle { get; }
    IReadOnlyList<IInputDevice> Devices { get; }
    void Update();
}
```

`Name` is a rough description of the input backend. Its value is not intrinsically meaningful.

> `Handle` is a globally-unique handle to memory for this input backend. The memory this handle actually points to is implementation-defined.

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to specify that it is globally unique? Why is that relevant?
Also why do we specify that this points to memory? This seems to only hold true as much as any integer points to *some* memory. (I'd think for OpenXR it'd not be an actual pointer, it'd just be a handle, like everything else? So It'd still theoretically point to memory, but no one would ever treat it as such)

Author: Makes sense!

Author: ```suggestion
`Id` is a globally-unique integral identifier for this backend.
```

`Devices` enumerates all of the **connected** devices available from this input backend. When a device is disconnected, its `IInputDevice` object should be discarded by all that consumed it, as it can not be relied upon for being reused by the input backend. An implementation is welcome to reuse old objects, but this is strictly implementation-defined. A device not being present in the `Devices` list is sufficient evidence that a device has been disconnected.

> `Update` will update the state of all devices contained within this input backend. The value of the `State` properties on each device must not change until this method is called. This is a departure from 1.0's and 2.0's model of updating state as soon as new information is available, which has resulted in lots of inconsistencies in the past.

Reviewer 2: Given that we now have a state model multi-threading may make more sense now.
So I feel this method is a little too relaxed. How exactly does it update the state? surely not atomically, that'd require a lock here and everywhere a state is read.
Why don't we just leave the updating of necessary devices to the user? I mean they can decide to, for example, update all the keyboards.
I think instead we should just provide a method that updates the connection status of devices, so updates the `Devices` list (atomically). From there users are free to enumerate the devices themselves and update as necessary.

Author: No user will care to do this, and asking the user to update each device or device list themselves is much more effort than the average user will care to put in.

On threading, I have updated the proposal to explicitly forbid using the `Update` method anywhere but the main thread as this is illegal on a couple of operating systems and by extension is illegal in the underlying APIs.

```suggestion
`Update` will update the state of all devices contained within this input backend. The value of the `State` properties on each device must not change until this method is called. This is a departure from 1.0's and 2.0's model of updating state as soon as new information is available, which has resulted in lots of inconsistencies in the past.

The onus is on the user to coordinate using this type across threads, as the input context is not thread safe. In addition, certain backends may have (unavoidable) restrictions on what thread `IInputBackend.Update` can be called on - the user is responsible for respecting these threading rules as well.

Threading rules for the reference implementation (if any) will be explicitly documented, and guidance for using this type safely against any first-party implementations will be included in the XML and user documentation.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** For example, it is illegal for GLFW functions to be called anywhere except the thread `glfwInit` was called on, and it is illegal on some operating systems (such as macOS) for `glfwInit` to be called anywhere except the thread that called `main`.
```

Reviewer 2: This doesn't resolve the conflict.
Does the proposal suggest that calling backed / context `.Update` atomically updates all devices? I wouldn't think so, that'd require a lock for every state read.
In that case we may have cases where a background thread reads states (idk, enumerates devices and looks at each of them) and while it does this states are being updated, making the cross-device view inconsistent.

Author: > Does the proposal suggest that calling backed / context .Update atomically updates all devices? I wouldn't think so, that'd require a lock for every state read.

Nope.

> In that case we may have cases where a background thread reads states (idk, enumerates devices and looks at each of them) and while it does this states are being updated, making the cross-device view inconsistent.

Yep.

> (I'm not suggesting we can't just say "this is by design, users have to deal with this" but I'd want a specific note that this is a potential issue)

Does my new comment not cover this? Namely `The onus is on the user to coordinate using this type across threads, as the input context is not thread safe.`. If not, can you suggest an elaborated sentence?

All of the `Devices` and `Update`s are aggregated and coordinated by a central input context object.

```cs
public partial class InputContext
{
    public Mice Mice { get; }
    public Keyboards Keyboards { get; }
    public Gamepads Gamepads { get; }
    public Joysticks Joysticks { get; }
    public IReadOnlyList<IInputDevice> Devices { get; }

>     public List<IInputBackend> Backends { get; }

Reviewer 2: IList instead of List?

Author: ```suggestion
    public IList<IInputBackend> Backends { get; }
```

    public void Update();
}
```

The central input object acts as the main entry point into the Input API, and is responsible for comparing the state reported by the devices for differences between `Update` calls (raising events as necessary). 

`Mice`, `Keyboards`, `Gamepads`, and `Joysticks` are all custom `IReadOnlyList` types for enumerating the **state** (given that the actual input objects are thin, and the state contains a reference to the original device anyway). However, these custom types also contain the events. This is so we can "scope" the events, rather than putting them at the top-level and having to call the events `MouseButtonDown`, `JoystickButtonDown`, etc.

By virtue of the `State` properties not updating until `IInputBackend.Update` is called, the states enumerated by the lists will not change until `Update` is called.

> `Update` will call `IInputBackend.Update` on each of the `Backends`, and retrieve the state for each device contained in each backend. As it is doing this, it updates the lists within the input context.

Reviewer 2: See the above Update comment, I feel this is even "worse" in terms of threading / safety concerns.

Author: Addressed above: the onus is on the user to use this type in a thread safe manor.

After the lists have been updated, the `Update` method compares the old state and the new state for that device and raises events accordingly. If there is no old state available for a device, the `ConnectionChanged` event (read on!) within each of the custom lists is called with a value of `true` signifying that a device has connected. Likewise, if there is no new state available for a device we have old state for, the `ConnectionChanged` event will be called with a value of `false` signifying that a device has been disconnected.

> `Backends` is a mutable list of input backends. Changes to this list do not take effect until `Update` is called again. The `ConnectionChanged` rules above will still be respected e.g. when you remove a backend, all of its devices will have a disconnected event raised for them.

Reviewer 2: > Changes to this list do not take effect until `Update` is called again.
Well, they will be reflected when enumerating the list. Not sure how, but consider rewording to make it clear that the system won't do anything when something is added.

Author: ```suggestion
`Backends` is a mutable list of input backends. Until `Update` is called again, no device lists, state, etc on the context will be updated. The `ConnectionChanged` rules above will still be respected e.g. when you remove a backend, all of its devices will have a disconnected event raised for them.
```

`Devices` contains all devices reported by all backends, including devices that do not necessarily fit into one of our more specialized wrapper lists. This means that if a backend has a device type we do not recognise, it will be accessible via this list.

## Custom List Types

These are relatively simple, though note that we explicitly implement the `IReadOnlyList` indexer in favour of one that returns a `ref readonly` type and a corresponding custom enumerator.

The actual type of the custom enumerator at this time the Silk.NET team would like to leave implementation defined, but with the following requirements:
- The `Next` method must return a `ref readonly` type.
- The type can be used as an operand in a `foreach` loop

> - While it may not necessarily implement `IEnumerator<T>`, it must implement the surface API as if it does where `T` is a `ref readonly` type (which is forbidden in the language today).  

Reviewer 2: Can't we just simplify this to be a ref readonly returning enumerator + "refer to the language rules"

Author: ```suggestion
The actual type of the custom enumerator at this time the Silk.NET team would like to leave implementation defined, but with the following requirements:
- The `Next` method must return a `ref readonly` type.
- The type can be used as an operand in a `foreach` loop
- This type is an enumerator type that returns a `ref readonly T` as defined by the C# language rules.
```

The Silk.NET team does **not** wish to reserve the right to breaking changes for custom enumerator types, so once this type has been defined by the implementation it will remain the same type throughout the entirety of 3.X's service life. 

All other details about the nature of the `IReadOnlyList` implementation (i.e. backing buffer) are implementation-defined.

```cs
public partial class Mice : IReadOnlyList<MouseState>
{
    public ref readonly MouseState this[int index] { get; }
    MouseState IReadOnlyList<MouseState>.this[int index] { get; }
    
    public <implementation defined> GetEnumerator();

>     IEnumerator<MouseState> IEnumerable<MouseState>.GetEnumerator();

Reviewer 2: Not like an expert, but if GetEnumerator() returns a ref enumerator, then you can't cast it to the interface iirc

Author: This is an implementation detail. As far as we're concerned here, the implementation must have a path to return an interface enumerator.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** The enumerator likely won't be a ref type, so this isn't an issue. You can have a type that enumerates `ref readonly` elements without the type being a ref type itself.

>     public event Action<ButtonEvent<MouseState, MouseButton>>? ButtonDown;

Reviewer 2: I'm a little bit on the fence about these events. Does it really make sense to have events indicating button up / button down? Can't we somehow indicate the "state delta"? Indicating what changed in the type seems wrong.

Author: Would an average user care enough?

    public event Action<ButtonEvent<MouseState, MouseButton>>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<ClickEvent<MouseState, MouseButton>>? Click;
    public event Action<ClickEvent<MouseState, MouseButton>>? DoubleClick;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<MouseState, Vector2>>? CursorMove;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<MouseState, Vector2>>? Scroll;
}

public partial class Keyboards : IReadOnlyList<KeyboardState>
{
    public ref readonly KeyboardState this[int index] { get; }
    KeyboardState IReadOnlyList<KeyboardState>.this[int index] { get; }
    
    public <implementation defined> GetEnumerator();
    IEnumerator<KeyboardState> IEnumerable<KeyboardState>.GetEnumerator();

    public event Action<ButtonEvent<KeyboardState, Key>>? KeyDown;
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<KeyboardState, Key>>? KeyUp;
    public event Action<TextEvent<KeyboardState>>? TextInput;
}

public partial class Gamepads : IReadOnlyList<GamepadState>
{
    public ref readonly GamepadState this[int index] { get; }
    GamepadState IReadOnlyList<GamepadState>.this[int index] { get; }
    
    public <implementation defined> GetEnumerator();

>     IEnumerator<GamepadState> IEnumerable<GamepadState>.GetEnumerator();

Reviewer 2: Same here

Author: yes

    
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<GamepadState, JoystickButton>>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<ButtonEvent<GamepadState, JoystickButton>>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<GamepadState, Vector2>>? ThumbstickMove;
    public event Action<AxisEvent<GamepadState, float>>? TriggerMove;
}

public partial class Joysticks : IReadOnlyList<JoystickState>
{
    public ref readonly JoystickState this[int index] { get; }
    JoystickState IReadOnlyList<JoystickState>.this[int index] { get; }
    
    public <implementation defined> GetEnumerator();

>     IEnumerator<JoystickState> IEnumerable<JoystickState>.GetEnumerator();

Reviewer 2: Same here

Author: yes

```cs
public readonly record struct ButtonEvent<TDevice, TButton>(in TDevice DeviceState, TButton Button);
public readonly record struct ClickEvent<TDevice, TButton>(in TDevice DeviceState, TButton Button, Vector2 Position);
public readonly record struct AxisEvent<TDevice, TAxis>(in TDevice DeviceState, int Index, TAxis OldValue, TAxis NewValue);
public readonly record struct TextEvent<TDevice>(in TDevice DeviceState, string? OldText, string? NewText);
```

This is the part of this proposal that incorporates the ideas in Enhanced Input Events, and is why this proposal supersedes that one.

One final point to note is that throughout the rest of the proposal the following type will be used:

```cs
public struct InputReadOnlyList<T> : IReadOnlyList<T>
{
    public InputReadOnlyList(IReadOnlyList<T> other);
}
```

The Silk.NET team wishes to reserve the right to add more constructors to this type as it sees fit.

This exists so that, should the Silk.NET choose to, we can optimize the lookup of elements while ensuring things like indexers are inlined and don't result in a virtual call if our implementation allows us to do so.

> **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** For example, for joystick and mouse buttons we could use a fixed-sized bit buffer where each bit represents an individual button: 1 for pressed, 0 for unpressed. But for something like keyboard input where there are a large amount of keys, we can't do that and will likely use `Memory<T>` instead.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this section, what is it for? Why do we define this struct here and how does it help with optimizing many different scenarios?

Author: This particular line is informative text, so it doesn't form part of the proposal at all - rather just describes the author's intent. We are completely free to ignore this line, and this is just giving _examples_ of the sorts of optimizations we could do.

I think the comment speaks for itself, and it's unobjectionable that an aggressively-inlined, non-virtual call that just does bitwise arithmetic is much more efficient than a virtual call iterating through a collection.

Reviewer 2: Right my problem is that this section suggests that we may use *different* implementations based on type or whatever, but this is a struct, there is no way to have multiple different implementations. There is no way to have both fixed-size bit buffer for mouse and a Memory<T> for keyboards.

Author: Well this doesn't suggest anything as it's **informative text**, all the proposal cares about is that it's a list, it's a struct, and is constructible from another list.

We have reserved the right to make more constructors above, which will allow us to make fast paths available to external backends.

It is my intention for this type to be constructible from any `IReadOnlyList<T>`, hence why I have specified that constructor here. 

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** Yeah, we'll likely be making a size trade-off for the fast path as you're right we can't have different implementations/memory layout per T.

This is an implementation detail that shouldn't impact the proposal - as far as the proposal is concerned there is no fast path, slow path, etc.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I'm not necessarily opposed to having this, just very confused why it's necessary. If we can't actually make a good fast path having this implementation detail doesn't seem logical.
Also, I think it is now valid to just return another implementing type when implementing an interface, so I think we could define all interfaces to be IReadOnlyList<T> and then where implementing we could just return an explicit, better, type?

Author: We can make a good fast path, but we can't switch one out per path without losing the actual fastness of the path due to a virtual call. As such, this just exists to be a thin wrapper over whatever we use. Also worth noting `Memory<T>` doesn't implement `IReadOnlyList<T>` so we'd need to do this somehow anyway.

But obviously, this is all informative text so it all doesn't matter and you can yell at me all you want when it comes to implementing it. The purpose of this section of the proposal is just to make sure you're happy with us having a struct list type so we can have optimizations that don't necessarily box and can be aggressively inlined.

# Mouse Input

As discussed earlier, the interface will be very simple.

```cs
public interface IMouse : IInputDevice
{
    MouseState State { get; }
    ICursorConfiguration Cursor { get; }
    void SetPosition(Vector2 pos);
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

> `Cursor` contains the cursor configuration. This isn't actually state that the end user can change, and has been made an interface rather than a state struct accordingly.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 is that true? Can the user not change the cursor configuration? I'm pretty sure they could
This is a bit ridiculous but why can't they use this menu for example:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22711887/151716308-b550b6b8-079c-4282-8cd2-aeba84ca5f58.png)

Author: Those aren't any of the configuration options we support or our underlying APIs support. Those are actually exclusively user options, too, and can't be easily queried to my knowledge.

`SetPosition` allows moving the mouse cursor without the end user physically moving their mouse.

The device state returned by `State` fills out the following structure:

```cs

> public struct MouseState

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public readonly struct MouseState
```

{

>     public IMouse Device { get; init; }

Reviewer 2: I thought the backend is free to re-use objects?
In that case we can't reference it here cause if a backend really does pooling this reference might point back to a now differently used object.

Author: Left intentionally undefined, but we can disallow this if you want?

Reviewer 2: My argument would be for removing the property as pooling is a good idea, and having this backwards reference is sort of unnecessary.
Removing it also creates a better sense of isolation for functions that operate on the state, as without the property they can't just update their state on their own

Author: I don't really want isolation though, as that will just annoy users who don't care about immutability or isolation, some users _just_ want to be able to get something that represents a mouse and check whether that has a button pressed, or move a cursor.

Reviewer 2: I think this leads to too many ways to use the API - I think it should be obvious what the "correct" way to use it is.
Right now we have multiple ways to find out about button presses, have multiple ways to modify devices, and it's not even very obvious which object I'm supposed to be passing around. Should my game loop receive an IMouse or a MouseState?
I think having this tiny ease of use features makes the whole API much less obvious to use.

Author: fine.

Author: Resolved - devices are no longer included in states.

    public MouseButtonState Buttons { get; init; }

>     public ICursorConfiguration Cursor { get; } // forwards to Device.Cursor

Reviewer 2: If we keep the cursor configuration as part of the device,  I think it should just be part of the device and not here.

Author: This is for ease-of-use: the average end user doesn't care about our reasoning that this is immutable state and to mutate it you need to go through another property. They just want to write their code in a clean way, so these forwarding properties enable that.

>     public Vector2 Position { get; set; } // all sets after the first set forward to Device.SetPosition

Reviewer 2: Why is this settable, I get that the user can move this - but this won't mutate the state!
I think there should instead be a method on the device to do this, and this should stay init-only

Author: This is settable for ease of use, forwarding to SetPosition. The average end user doesn't care about our reasoning that this is immutable state and to mutate it you need to go through another property. They just want to write their code in a clean way, so these forwarding properties enable that.

However, if you think that this state structure being readonly (and thus `Position` not updating after `set`), perhaps we should remove the `readonly` restriction. This API is focused on being easy-to-use, and the immutable state is just a courtesy for the Working Group's feedback of wanting to be able to capture a state snapshot with ease.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I think the end users code will actually end up better and more obvious if we stick to state being 100% immutable. I think this for two reasons:
- The user can end up setting this value and reading it back will result in seemingly no change
- When trying to architect larger solutions involving this code passing the state should do just that - pass the state. Not give full control over the mouse/device to the called method.
I think this ultimately is the same discussion as having the backwards reference above.

Author: But the real question is, how to we expose the device then? The input context today doesn't expose the devices any other way.

We'd have to essentially have the lists iterate a `(IMouse Device, MouseState State)` which at that point they are just as tied as they would be if `IMouse` is in here.

No matter what we do, someone somewhere will complain when they set the position, either via `Device.SetPosition`, the original `Position` `set`ter, whatever; that the state is not updated. I'm leaning more towards just implicitly updating the state if the user explicitly changes it to alleviate confusion.

Reviewer 2: > I'm leaning more towards just implicitly updating the state
I'd be strongly against this - the whole point is that the state represents a snapshot in time.

> We'd have to essentially have the lists iterate a (IMouse Device, MouseState State)
Why? It's just fine if it iterates `IMouse`, from where the state can be retrieved using `mouse.State`?
I don't think removing the state interacting with the device changes anything about the rest of the design?

Author: That's fair, you've worn me down. Will adjust.

Author: Oh but are you fine with me changing the state properties to `ref readonly MouseState` so users don't accidentally copy lots (as they inevitably would e.g. `if (mouse.State.Buttons[MouseButton.LeftButton] || mouse.State.Buttons[MouseButton.MiddleButton)` etc)

Author: Resolved - input context now enumerates devices.

    public Vector2 WheelPosition { get; init; }
}
```

> For ease-of-use, all APIs on `Device` (other than state) are accessible via the state struct, as indicated in the comments in the API snippet.

Reviewer 2: See comments above

Author: yes

Author: Resolved above

`MouseButtonState` is defined as:
```cs

> public struct MouseButtonState

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public readonly struct MouseButtonState
```

{

>     public bool this[MouseButton btn] { get; }

Reviewer 2: Why is this not init-able?

Author: This is addressed in the comment on line 281, it doesn't make sense for anything else being the case.

    public InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Down { get; init; }

>     public InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Up { get; }

Reviewer 2: Why is one init-able and the other isn't?

Author: This is addressed in the comment on line 281, it doesn't make sense for anything else being the case.

Reviewer 2: Line 281 refers to an implementation detail though, from the point of the API that doesn't make much sense.

Author: That's not an implementation detail as it's not **informative text**. This is a requirement. 

It doesn't make sense (especially for later on with `Keys`) for an implementation to specify everything that _isn't_ pressed, because first of that could create lots of inconsistencies between backends if they don't do things properly or don't support as many buttons, then we have to go through and cross-reference that with `MouseButton` itself, etc etc. 

There are more implications if we don't force them to implement it a specific way than if we do.

}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular button is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the button state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set.

## Enums

```cs
public enum MouseButton
{
    Unknown,
    LeftButton,
    RightButton,
    MiddleButton,
    Button4,
    Button5,
    Button6,
    Button7,
    Button8,
    Button9,
    Button10,
    Button11,
    Button12,
    Button13,
    Button14,
    Button15,
    Button16,
    Button17,
    Button18,
    Button19,
    Button20,
    Button21,
    Button22,
    Button23,
    Button24,
    Button25,
    Button26,
    Button27,
    Button28,
    Button29,
    Button30,

>     Button31

Reviewer 2: Is there a good way to say why this ends at 31? otherwise we should probably specify that we provide these as names (for the respective number), but giving `(MouseButton)212` is valid to retrieve the 212th mouse button

Author: Because the USB HID spec (page 61) only allocates up to 4 bits for buttons (3 bits + a device-specific bit which can be used as another button bit).

It is impossible today for there to be more buttons than this. If a use case for more than 31 buttons arises, we should update the API then.

`SupportedFlags` is a bitmask containing other supported options for the cursor which can be mixed and matched if supported. This must be queried before setting `Flags` - the currently active options. An exception should be thrown if an attempt is made to set an unsupported flag on `Flags`. Unlike the other properties, `Flags` can have multiple bits set.

`Flags` replaces `IsConfined`, which was undefined behaviour on platforms where it was not supported in 2.X - now with `SupportedFlags` you can query its support before setting it.

### Enums

```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorModes
{
    Normal,
    Hidden = 1 << 0,
    Disabled = 1 << 1,

>     Raw = 1 << 2

Reviewer 2: Are these numbers truly part of the proposal? Feels like they can be removed.
In addition, "Normal" needs a bit as well (for checking & representation in supported modes)

Author: These numbers should be required, yes. No bits set being no non-standard modes set (every backend must support `Normal`) and specifying "each value must have only one bit set" feels naff compared to... just setting it here? We're programmers, we can read code. 

If you really feel strongly about this we can just reserve the right to change the values, but I think even that has potential to annoy people using serializers for example.

}
```
```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorStyles
{
    Default,
    Arrow = 1 << 0,
    IBeam = 1 << 1,
    Crosshair = 1 << 2,
    Hand = 1 << 3,
    HResize = 1 << 4,
    VResize = 1 << 5,

>     Custom = 1 << 6,

Reviewer 2: See above.

Author: yes

}
```
```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorFlags
{
    None,

>     Confined = 1 << 0

Reviewer 2: See above.

Author: yes

}
```

# Keyboard Input

Once again, the interface is very simple.

```cs
public interface IKeyboard : IInputDevice
{
    KeyboardState State { get; }
    void BeginInput();
    void EndInput();
    void SetClipboardText(string? clipboard);
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`BeginInput` starts recording textual input, bringing up the on-screen keyboard on platforms where this is needed (i.e. mobile). Unlike 2.0, this is now required given that textual input is now on a full-string basis rather than a per-char basis, and we don't want to record textual input unless the user asks us to.

For instance, instead of a `KeyChar` event being raised every time a character is pressed or repeated, a `TextInput` event is raised as the string is being built alleviating the need for developers to build the string themselves, given that the primary use of this event is for GUI input.

`SetClipboardText` allows setting the text on the user's clipboard so they can paste information from your application in others.

`KeyboardState` is defined as follows:

```cs

> public struct KeyboardState

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public readonly struct KeyboardState
```

{

>     public IKeyboard Device { get; init; }

Reviewer 2: See above

Author: yes

Author: Resolved above

>     public string? ClipboardText { get; set; } // all sets after the first set forward to Device.SetClipboardText

Reviewer 2: I would rather remove the set. It's not obvious what is happening when a property is set but the read value isn't updated.

Author: Same response as before - if you think not updating the read value could be confusing then we should make it update the read value.

<sub>
...also I think in any case whether this is a property setter or a set method, users _will_ be confused if ClipboardText doesn't update.</sub>

Author: Resolved - forwarding is gone.

    public string? Text { get; init; }
    public KeyState Keys { get; init; }
}
```

> For ease-of-use, all APIs on `Device` (other than state) are accessible via the state struct, as indicated in the comments in the API snippet.

Reviewer 2: See above

Author: yes

Author: resolved above

```cs
public readonly struct KeyState
{
    public bool this[KeyName btn] { get; }
    public bool this[int scancode] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<Key> Down { get; init; }

>     public InputReadOnlyList<Key> Up { get; }

Reviewer 2: Same questions regarding init

Author: Already addressed on line 435, doesn't really make sense to be implemented any other way.

}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular key is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the key state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set. Scancode-only keys will not be present in `Up`.

Note because not all keys are named, and because some developers may prefer to use scancodes instead, a `Key` struct is used instead of just having the list be a list of key names.

```cs
public readonly record struct Key(KeyName Name, int Scancode);
```

`KeyName` will be `Unknown` for scancode-only, unnamed keys.

## Enums

```cs
public enum KeyName
{

>     Unknown,

Reviewer 2: Should be specified to be 0

Author: ```suggestion
    Unknown = 0,
```

    Space,
    Apostrophe /* ' */,
    Comma /* , */,
    Minus /* - */,
    Period /* . */,
    Slash /* / */,
    Number0,
    D0,
    Number1,
    Number2,
    Number3,
    Number4,
    Number5,
    Number6,
    Number7,
    Number8,
    Number9,
    Semicolon /* ; */,
    Equal /* = */,
    A,
    B,
    C,
    D,
    E,
    F,
    G,
    H,
    I,
    J,
    K,
    L,
    M,
    N,
    O,
    P,
    Q,
    R,
    S,
    T,
    U,
    V,
    W,
    X,
    Y,
    Z,
    LeftBracket /* [ */,
    BackSlash /* \ */,
    RightBracket /* ] */,
    GraveAccent /* ` */,

>     World1 /* non-US #1 */,
>     World2 /* non-US #2 */,

Reviewer 2: These should be removed per what is written below
```suggestion
```

The Silk.NET team wishes to reserve the right to remove any key names which do not have a matching en-US scancode. This is because the above enum is just copied and pasted from 2.X, and has not been cross-referenced with the keyboard layout at this time.

# Gamepad Input

```cs
public interface IGamepad : IInputDevice
{
    GamepadState State { get; }
    IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors { get; }
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`VibrationMotors` enumerates the vibration motors on the device. The values within `IMotor` do not change according to end user input, as such they are not encapsulated in the `State`, following the same principles as `ICursorConfiguration`.

`IMotor` is defined as follows:
```cs
public interface IMotor
{
    float Speed { get; set; }
}
```

This is exactly as in 2.X.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** It is possible that, should integration with DualSense controllers be implemented, that more properties are added to `IMotor` than just `Speed`.

`GamepadState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public struct GamepadState
{

>     public IGamepad Device { get; init; }

Reviewer 2: See above

Author: yes

Author: resolved above

    public JoystickButtonState Buttons { get; init; }
    public DualReadOnlyList<Vector2> Thumbsticks { get; init; }
    public DualReadOnlyList<float> Triggers { get; init; }

>     public IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors { get; } // forwards to forwards Device.VibrationMotors for ease of use

Reviewer 2: See above

Author: yes

Author: resolved above

}
```

`GamepadState` reuses a lot of the joystick API types, which are defined later in this proposal.

`Thumbsticks` contain the two thumbsticks on this gamepad. The X and Y values within this list range from -1 to 1: -1 being leftmost, and 1 being rightmost.

`Triggers` contains the two triggers on thsi gamepad. The values within this list range from 0 to 1: 0 being unpressed, and 1 being fully pressed.

Note the use of the `DualReadOnlyList` type. This is basically just:
```cs
public readonly struct DualReadOnlyList<T> : IReadOnlyList<T>
{
    public readonly T E0;
    public readonly T E1;
}
```

> This is used where the list will only ever have exactly two elements, mainly because the "gamepad" form factor is standard and it doesn't make sense to have multiple thumbsticks or triggers given a human only has two thumbs or index fingers. More exotic devices should be exposed using the joystick API.

Reviewer 2: I'm not generally opposed to it but think this will generally make end-users use some emulation tool (For example myself and my steam controller)

Author: That's fine, as this basically mimics the actual values we get from the underlying APIs anyway so in any case they'd need to do this.

# Joystick Input

This is the polyglot interface for any other human input device that roughly meets the description of being "joystick".

```cs
public interface IJoystick : IInputDevice
{
    JoystickState State { get; }
}
```
```cs
public struct JoystickState
{
    public IJoystick Device { get; init; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<float> Axes { get; init; }
    public JoystickButtonState Buttons { get; init; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<Vector2> Hats { get; init; }
}
```

This is pretty closely modeled as in 2.X: `Axes` containing the individual axes that can be represented by this joystick, `Buttons` containing the buttons which can be pressed, and `Hats` containing the hats.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** The only difference is `Hats` is now a `Vector2` instead of a `Position2D`. It is still intended that the X and Y values are only ever `0` or `1`, but this is not a requirement for more exotic backends.

`JoystickButtonState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public struct JoystickButtonState
{
    public bool this[JoystickButton btn] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<JoystickButton> Down { get; init; }

>     public InputReadOnlyList<JoystickButton> Up { get; }

Reviewer 2: Same init questions

Author: Addressed on line 670, doesn't make sense to be done any other way etc etc.

```cs
public static class InputWindowExtensions
{
    public static IInputBackend CreateInputBackend(this WindowHandles window);
    public static IInputBackend CreateInputBackend(this IWindowHandlesSource window);
    public static InputContext CreateInput(this WindowHandles window);
    public static InputContext CreateInput(this IWindowHandlesSource window);
}
```

The `CreateInputBackend` will create an instance of the reference implementation for the given `WindowHandles`. The `IWindowHandlesSource` overloads just forward to the `WindowHandles` overload. This is because `ISurface` will implement `IWindowHandlesSource`, so the extension methods will be usable on an `ISurface` without having a hard reference between Windowing and Input.

The `CreateInput` methods simply return an `InputContext` preconfigured with the backend created by `CreateInputBackend` for ease of use.

Please see the Windowing 3.0 proposal for `IWindowHandlesSource` and `WindowHandles`.

# Devices, Backends, and Contexts

Input devices all inherit from a root interface.

```cs
public interface IInputDevice
{

>     nint BackendId { get; }

Author: ```suggestion
    nint Id { get; }
```

    string Name { get; }
}
```

`BackendId` is an integral identifier for this device unique to this backend **only** - i.e. it is not globally unique, and if you have an input context with multiple backends there may be multiple devices with a particular `BackendId`. It may be a handle to memory, or it may be a generic integral index - this is implementation-defined.

`Name` is a rough description of the input device. Its value is not intrinsically meaningful.

All devices originate from a context.

```cs
public interface IInputBackend
{
    string Name { get; }

>     nint Handle { get; }

Author: ```suggestion
    nint Id { get; }
```

### Enums

```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorModes
{
    Normal,
    Hidden = 1 << 0,
    Disabled = 1 << 1,
    Raw = 1 << 2
}
```
```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorStyles
{
    Default,
    Arrow = 1 << 0,
    IBeam = 1 << 1,
    Crosshair = 1 << 2,
    Hand = 1 << 3,
    HResize = 1 << 4,
    VResize = 1 << 5,
    Custom = 1 << 6,
}
```
```cs
[Flags]
public enum CursorFlags
{
    None,
    Confined = 1 << 0
}
```

# Keyboard Input

Once again, the interface is very simple.

```cs
public interface IKeyboard : IInputDevice
{
    KeyboardState State { get; }
    void BeginInput();
    void EndInput();
    void SetClipboardText(string? clipboard);
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`BeginInput` starts recording textual input, bringing up the on-screen keyboard on platforms where this is needed (i.e. mobile). Unlike 2.0, this is now required given that textual input is now on a full-string basis rather than a per-char basis, and we don't want to record textual input unless the user asks us to.

> For instance, instead of a `KeyChar` event being raised every time a character is pressed or repeated, a `TextInput` event is raised as the string is being built alleviating the need for developers to build the string themselves, given that the primary use of this event is for GUI input.

Reviewer: So if my app asks you to type something into a textbox, the app wouldn't get the text until I'm done typing it? Usually the textbox fills up as you type

Author: No (will clarify) you get the string as it’s being built i.e. if you’re typing “Hello” you will get “H” and then “He” and then “Hel” etc etc.

Reviewer: That's not memory efficient and unnecessarily complicates doing any filtering on the characters. I can't really vouch for changing `KeyChar` to this

Author: The problem is, there is no way with an immutable state to actually get things like key repeats. What if you capture state, and between the next time you capture state there have been 5 repeats of a character? You will only get `c` - you have no idea how many times that character has been repeated. Now you could say "oh we'd just store the number of repeats", but that doesn't work either because what if you have 5 repeats _and then_ a different key press - you have lost an entire 5 characters of the string. We have to buffer it somehow, and it only makes sense for _textual_ input to buffer it into a string. **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** The memory inefficiency is also one of the primary reasons why I specified we don't capture char pressed outside of `BeginInput`/`EndInput`, in addition to the write-once-run-everywhere implications we're shooting for in 3.0.

Reviewer: I don't understand why immutable states complicates this, wouldn't `KeyChar` still get called once for every char, including repeats?

Author: No, the events only get called when we detect a state change (see line 106 of the latest diff describing how `Update` works).

Reviewer: I'm still baffled by this whole redesign. You mention that with it you're trying to solve problems or issues reported by users, can you make a list of these? Maybe that'll help me better understand the reasoning

Author: The main issue from a user perspective that we're solving is how event bindings work. Today, users complain about having to bind events on each individual device whereas realistically there's no reason for them to do this.

The Working Group indicated that it would like to be able to capture state, today this is a second class citizen thus we have redesigned the API around this principle.

Plus, it just makes sense because the SDL backend and GLFW backend are horribly inconsistent on when events actually happen, though this has improved recently it certainly is not 100% due to how they work. This would fix a number of inconsistencies reported by users between the two backends.

This makes more code common and reduces the responsibility of each individual backend, which will result in a more bug-free result and expectations will be more consistent: the input API is basically "driven" by the input context itself which doesn't know anything about the backend implementations, which to be honest is how we should've done this from the start.

Reviewer: That does clear many things up for me; are users supposed to be able to simply copy the `device.State` struct to capture states? I still dislike the replacement of `KeyChar` though

Author: Yes (though a copy may not be mandatory as the property I'm hoping will be `ref readonly`, which will prevent the compiler from copying unless absolutely necessary).

Author: I've implemented the `ref readonly` now to prevent accidental copying.

```cs
public readonly record struct MouseState
(
    MouseButtonState Buttons,
    Vector2 Position,
    Vector2 WheelPosition
);
```

`MouseButtonState` is defined as:
```cs
public readonly record struct MouseButtonState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Down
)
{
    public bool this[MouseButton btn] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Up { get; }
}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular button is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the button state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set.

Changes to `MouseState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Actors section).

```cs
public interface IMouseActor : IActor
{
    void HandleButtonDown(ButtonEvent<IMouse, MouseButton> @event);
    void HandleButtonUp(ButtonEvent<IMouse, MouseButton> @event);
    void HandleCursorMove(AxisEvent<IMouse, Vector2> @event);

>     void HandleScroll(AxisEvent<IMouse, Vector2> @event);

Reviewer: Mouse button events should come with the modifier keys that are pressed at the time of the event, like in the proposal for Enhanced Input Events. Same goes for keyboard keyup/keydown.

Author: Got it. I suppose I should make all of the events non-generic so we can be free to add extra properties to them later.

Reviewer: That does sound nice

Reviewer: @Perksey I think we should add the key modifiers argument not just to ButtonDown/ButtonUp but also to Click/DoubleClick

Author: As discussed in Discord [here](https://discord.com/channels/521092042781229087/587346162802229298/941082429756690452), scrapping this.

(
    InputReadOnlyList<Key> Down
)
{
    public bool this[KeyName btn] { get; }
    public bool this[int scancode] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<Key> Up { get; }
}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular key is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the key state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set. Scancode-only keys will not be present in `Up`.

Note because not all keys are named, and because some developers may prefer to use scancodes instead, a `Key` struct is used instead of just having the list be a list of key names.

```cs
public readonly record struct Key(KeyName Name, int Scancode);
```

`KeyName` will be `Unknown` for scancode-only, unnamed keys.

Changes to `KeyboardState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Actors section).

```cs
public interface IKeyboardActor : IActor
{

>     void HandleKeyDown(ButtonEvent<IKeyboard, Key> @event);

Reviewer: What about key repeats?

Author: Handled as in Enhanced Input Events

Reviewer: When the KeyDown event is raised for the user, there should be a bool parameter indicating whether it's a repeat

    void HandleKeyUp(ButtonEvent<IKeyboard, Key> @event);

>     void HandleTextInput(TextEvent<IKeyboard> @event);

Reviewer: Wouldn't it make more sense to just leave `KeyChar` at this point? Even if we want to expose a `KeyboardState.Text` and have Silk build the string, it would make more sense and cause less implementation friction if each backend didn't have to copy-paste the same stringbuilder logic

Author: Agreed, will fix in a bit

# Gamepad Input

```cs
public interface IGamepad : IInputDevice
{
    ref readonly GamepadState State { get; }
    IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors { get; }
}
```

`State` is the device state as defined earlier.

`VibrationMotors` enumerates the vibration motors on the device. The values within `IMotor` do not change according to end user input, as such they are not encapsulated in the `State`, following the same principles as `ICursorConfiguration`.

`IMotor` is defined as follows:
```cs
public interface IMotor
{
    float Speed { get; set; }
}
```

This is exactly as in 2.X.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** It is possible that, should integration with DualSense controllers be implemented, that more properties are added to `IMotor` than just `Speed`.

`GamepadState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public readonly record struct GamepadState
(
    JoystickButtonState Buttons,
    DualReadOnlyList<Vector2> Thumbsticks,
    DualReadOnlyList<float> Triggers,

>     IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors

Reviewer: `GamepadState` exposes the same `IMotor` as is already on `IGamepad`, but if the same `IMotor` instances are used then they could change on the next `Update()` (And also they're settable!)

I'd recommend removing these from `GamepadState` altogether (and JoystickState probably has something similar)

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** Some backends, such as OpenXR, may only operate on a state query basis, and obviously we only query the state when `Update` is called. This is the reason why it's only a "where possible" requirement, because if we can't actually get the events in the order they happened from the underlying backend (like we can for GLFW, for example) then it's impossible for us to convey this up to the developer. However, regardless of backend-specifics, a `State` update must always be paired with an handler method call.

> The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other handler interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the handler, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `handler` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `handler` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered.

Author: ```suggestion
The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other handler interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the handler, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `handler` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `handler` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered. All events, including those that were not delivered due to the actor not implementing a necessary interface, must be discarded at the end of the `Update` call.
```

    public void Update();
}
```

The central input object acts as the main entry point into the Input API, and is responsible for comparing the state reported by the devices for differences between `Update` calls (raising events as necessary). 

`Mice`, `Keyboards`, `Gamepads`, and `Joysticks` are all custom `IReadOnlyList` types for enumerating the **state** (given that the actual input objects are thin, and the state contains a reference to the original device anyway). However, these custom types also contain the events. This is so we can "scope" the events, rather than putting them at the top-level and having to call the events `MouseButtonDown`, `JoystickButtonDown`, etc.

By virtue of the `State` properties not updating until `IInputBackend.Update` is called, the states enumerated by the lists will not change until `Update` is called.

`Update` will call `IInputBackend.Update` on each of the `Backends`, passing in a handler which implements `IInputHandler`, `IMouseInputHandler`, `IKeyboardInputHandler`, `IGamepadInputHandler`, and `IJoystickInputHandler` with each of the methods invoking a matching event defined in "Custom List Types".

> After the lists have been updated, the `Update` method compares the old state and the new state for that device and raises events accordingly. If there is no old state available for a device, the `ConnectionChanged` event (read on!) within each of the custom lists is called with a value of `true` signifying that a device has connected. Likewise, if there is no new state available for a device we have old state for, the `ConnectionChanged` event will be called with a value of `false` signifying that a device has been disconnected.

Reviewer: > If there is no old state available for a device, the `ConnectionChanged` event...

Shouldn't we use the events from the handlers for this? Doesn't make much sense if the `InputContext` has to compare the old and new lists when the backend now tells us whenever a device connects or disconnects

Author: I agree, this is an outdated comment!
```suggestion
The central input object acts as the main entry point into the Input API, and is responsible for comparing the state reported by the devices for differences between `Update` calls (raising events as necessary). 

`Mice`, `Keyboards`, `Gamepads`, and `Joysticks` are all custom `IReadOnlyList` types for enumerating the **state** (given that the actual input objects are thin, and the state contains a reference to the original device anyway). However, these custom types also contain the events. This is so we can "scope" the events, rather than putting them at the top-level and having to call the events `MouseButtonDown`, `JoystickButtonDown`, etc.

By virtue of the `State` properties not updating until `IInputBackend.Update` is called, the states enumerated by the lists will not change until `Update` is called.

`Update` will call `IInputBackend.Update` on each of the `Backends`, passing in a handler which implements `IInputHandler`, `IMouseInputHandler`, `IKeyboardInputHandler`, `IGamepadInputHandler`, and `IJoystickInputHandler` with each of the methods invoking a matching event defined in "Custom List Types" or on the input context itself (such as `ConnectionChanged`).
```

`ClipboardText` allows getting and setting the text on the user's clipboard so they can paste information to/from your application in others.

`KeyboardState` is defined as follows:

```cs
public readonly record struct KeyboardState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<char>? Text,
    KeyState Keys
);
```

`Text` contains the characters typed on the keyboard since `IKeyboard.BeginInput`, and accounts for backspaces. This is cleared (set to `null`) when `IKeyboard.EndInput` is called, and will not be non-`null` again until another `IKeyboard.BeginInput` call. Given that `KeyChar` events are raised one character at a time, this property will update one character at a time to keep the state consistent with the event.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** This is something we can optimize in `InputList` to not be allocatey, rest assured it is not acceptable to the Silk.NET team to allocate a new list for every character.

```cs
public readonly record struct KeyState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<Key> Down
)
{
    public bool this[KeyName btn] { get; }
    public bool this[int scancode] { get; }

>     public InputReadOnlyList<Key> Up { get; }

Reviewer: I'd get rid of `KeyState.Up`. It would make more sense if we had gone purely state-based, but having the events now this just seems like bloat

Reviewer: > `Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set. Scancode-only keys will not be present in `Up`.

Also, why would it not include scancode-only keys? the `Key` struct contains both `KeyName` and scancode

Author: On `KeyState.Up`, we can get rid of this but this is mostly for parity with the other button states. This implementation of this won't be too hard or inefficient, either. There is probably a case where a user would want to use `KeyState.Up` that I haven't thought of, admittedly it's far less likely than the other states but just wanted to make sure all the states looked the same just in case.

Author: No, that's because we'll have to have `InputReadOnlyList` contain one `Key` for every single value of `int` i.e. every single scancode.

Author: Hmmm... actually it is possible we could implement this in an efficient way but I still feel it only makes sense to include named keys.

Reviewer: Wait, is `KeyState.Up` supposed to be "the keys that were `Down` last update but aren't this update" or is it supposed to be "The keys that are not in `Down`"?

Author: "The keys that are not in `Down`"

Reviewer: How would we efficiently implement this? Remember it has to implement `IReadOnlyList`, so it has to be enumerable, contain a `Count`, and access by index.

Author: **INFORMATIVE TEXT:**
- for index:
    1. assume that the index is the final scancode.
    2. iterate over `Down`.
        a. if the scancode is smaller than the index, decrement the index by one
    3. return a `Key` containing the index as the scancode and a named mapping if possible
- for enumerator:
    - either iterate over all keynames or if we do decide to include unnamed keys iterate over all values of `int`
...

now that i'm typing this i realise this is entirely stupid. we should just only have `Down` everywhere. Agree?

Reviewer: Haha, agreed

Author: Removed now.

`IMotor` is defined as follows:
```cs
public interface IMotor
{
    float Speed { get; set; }
}
```

This is exactly as in 2.X.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** It is possible that, should integration with DualSense controllers be implemented, that more properties are added to `IMotor` than just `Speed`.

`GamepadState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public readonly record struct GamepadState
(
    JoystickButtonState Buttons,
    DualReadOnlyList<Vector2> Thumbsticks,
    DualReadOnlyList<float> Triggers,
    IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors
);
```

`GamepadState` reuses a lot of the joystick API types, which are defined later in this proposal.

`Thumbsticks` contain the two thumbsticks on this gamepad. The X and Y values within this list range from -1 to 1: -1 being leftmost, and 1 being rightmost.

`Triggers` contains the two triggers on thsi gamepad. The values within this list range from 0 to 1: 0 being unpressed, and 1 being fully pressed.

Note the use of the `DualReadOnlyList` type. This is basically just:
```cs
public readonly struct DualReadOnlyList<T> : IReadOnlyList<T>
{
    public readonly T E0;
    public readonly T E1;
}

> ```

Reviewer: If `GamepadState` can only have two Thumbsticks/Triggers, why don't we expose them as Left and Right and avoid users the hassle of checking which is which?

Author: ```suggestion
public readonly record struct GamepadState
(
    JoystickButtonState Buttons,
    DualReadOnlyList<Vector2> Thumbsticks,
    DualReadOnlyList<float> Triggers,
    IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors
);
```

`GamepadState` reuses a lot of the joystick API types, which are defined later in this proposal.

`Thumbsticks` contain the two thumbsticks on this gamepad. The X and Y values within this list range from -1 to 1: -1 being leftmost, and 1 being rightmost.

`Triggers` contains the two triggers on thsi gamepad. The values within this list range from 0 to 1: 0 being unpressed, and 1 being fully pressed.

Note the use of the `DualReadOnlyList` type. This is basically just:
```cs
public readonly struct DualReadOnlyList<T> : IReadOnlyList<T>
{
    public readonly T Left;
    public readonly T Right;
}
```
```

Author: Done.

    public static InputContext CreateInput(this IWindowHandlesSource window);
}
```

The `CreateInputBackend` will create an instance of the reference implementation for the given `WindowHandles`. The `IWindowHandlesSource` overloads just forward to the `WindowHandles` overload. This is because `ISurface` will implement `IWindowHandlesSource`, so the extension methods will be usable on an `ISurface` without having a hard reference between Windowing and Input.

The `CreateInput` methods simply return an `InputContext` preconfigured with the backend created by `CreateInputBackend` for ease of use.

Please see the Windowing 3.0 proposal for `IWindowHandlesSource` and `WindowHandles`.

# Devices

Input devices all inherit from a root interface.

```cs
public interface IInputDevice
{
    nint Id { get; }
    string Name { get; }
}
```

`Id` is an globally-unique integral identifier for this device.

`Name` is a rough description of the input device. Its value is not intrinsically meaningful.

All devices originate from a backend.

# Backends

```cs
public interface IInputBackend
{
    string Name { get; }
    nint Id { get; }
    IReadOnlyList<IInputDevice> Devices { get; }

>     void Update(IInputHandler? actor = null);

Reviewer: Could the `Update(handler)` logic bring performance disadvantages? It has to check whether the passed IInputHandler also implements the other interfaces. What if instead we pass this object once in something like `IInputBacked.SetInputHandler()` so these checks don't have to happen all the time?

Author: If they do, it'd only be until PGO kicks in and in any case I'm confident that the performance impact will be negligible: a few type checks won't touch a ~360FPS game loop (which I'm pretty sure 360Hz is the highest refresh rate monitor around today, so I'm using that as the maximum meaningful FPS)

We can do testing of course, and could possibly even reserve the right to change this method if you'd like according to testing, but I'm not convinced that using the type system will cause significant performance impact for the amount we're calling it.

Author: For reference disassembly:
```cs

    [MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.NoInlining)]
    public static IInputBackend GetBackend() => new Backend();
    public static void M() {
        var myThing = GetBackend();
        var myOtherThing = new Nothing();
        myThing.Update((IInputHandler)myOtherThing);
    }
```
```asm

    L0000: push rsi
    L0001: sub rsp, 0x20
    L0005: mov rcx, 0x7ffb2751db20
    L000f: call 0x00007ffb7b5baf20
    L0014: mov rsi, rax
    L0017: call 0x00007ffb275104f0
    L001c: mov rcx, rax
    L001f: mov rdx, rsi
    L0022: mov r11, 0x7ffb27517000
    L002c: mov rax, [0x7ffb27517000]
    L0033: add rsp, 0x20
    L0037: pop rsi
    L0038: jmp rax
```

Not clean, but not the worst thing in the world for something that is called once per update in the typical case. And CPU caching might help us out further with those calls. I wouldn't be too worried.

>     void Update(IInputHandler? actor = null);

Author: ```suggestion
    void Update(IInputHandler? handler = null);
```

The onus is on the user to coordinate using this type across threads, as the input context is not thread safe. In addition, certain backends may have (unavoidable) restrictions on what thread `IInputBackend.Update` can be called on - the user is responsible for respecting these threading rules as well.

Threading rules for the reference implementation (if any) will be explicitly documented, and guidance for using this type safely against any first-party implementations will be included in the XML and user documentation.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** For example, it is illegal for GLFW functions to be called anywhere except the thread `glfwInit` was called on, and it is illegal on some operating systems (such as macOS) for `glfwInit` to be called anywhere except the thread that called `main`.

## Input Handlers

Some users will want to receive events in the order that they happen. Observing state does not allow us to do this if, for instance, a button was pressed and released between update calls - the state would have a net-zero change and thus we wouldn't be able to detect such events.

> This is solved by the actor model, which is implemented by the custom list types - the actor methods invoking the matching events.
> 
> **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** A possible question is "why don't we just expose the events directly on the devices? Why do we need this actor model?". The answer to that is having events on the devices has considerations for the lifetime of the device objects, which the Silk.NET team wishes to leave unrestricted. For instance, when a device connects the input context will need to bind the events on each device itself and when a device disconnects the behaviour thereafter would be undefined because we have not explicitly allowed or disallowed the reuse of device objects, and we do not wish to. If a device object were to be reused when the device reconnects, those events would still be there. It's better to encapsulate these events in their own object using this actor model.

Author: ```suggestion
This is solved by the handler model, which is implemented by the custom list types - the handler methods invoking the matching events.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** A possible question is "why don't we just expose the events directly on the devices? Why do we need this handler model?". The answer to that is having events on the devices has considerations for the lifetime of the device objects, which the Silk.NET team wishes to leave unrestricted. For instance, when a device connects the input context will need to bind the events on each device itself and when a device disconnects the behaviour thereafter would be undefined because we have not explicitly allowed or disallowed the reuse of device objects, and we do not wish to. If a device object were to be reused when the device reconnects, those events would still be there. It's better to encapsulate these events in their own object using this handler model.
```

```cs
public interface IInputHandler
{
    void HandleDeviceConnectionChanged(ConnectionEvent @event);
}
```

The base `IInputHandler` is simple, handling only device connections and device disconnections.

`HandleDeviceConnectionChanged` must be called with a device and a value of `true` if the `ConnectionEvent.Device` has just been added to the `IInputBackend.Devices` list.

`HandleDeviceConnectionChanged` must be called with a device and a value of `false` if the `ConnectionEvent.Device` has just been removed from the `IInputBackend.Devices` list.

> All actor methods are called in the order that the state changes happened in the underlying backend. For example, a "double click" would be mouse down, mouse up, mouse down, and mouse up again. Even if those events happened entirely between two update calls (thus resulting in a net-zero change of state, given the button was released at the last update and is still released at this update), the input backend is expected to queue up the events so they may be delivered to the actor in the order in which they occurred when `Update` is called **where possible**. The events being in order is preferred and strongly recommended for backend implementations, and if a backend is able to order events in this way it is required to do so and required to do so consistently. If the backend is unable to do so, then the events being in order is not required. 
> 
> **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** Some backends, such as OpenXR, may only operate on a state query basis, and obviously we only query the state when `Update` is called. This is the reason why it's only a "where possible" requirement, because if we can't actually get the events in the order they happened from the underlying backend (like we can for GLFW, for example) then it's impossible for us to convey this up to the developer. However, regardless of backend-specifics, a `State` update must always be paired with an actor method call.
> 
> The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other actor interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the actor, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `actor` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `actor` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered.

Author: ```suggestion
All handler methods are called in the order that the state changes happened in the underlying backend. For example, a "double click" would be mouse down, mouse up, mouse down, and mouse up again. Even if those events happened entirely between two update calls (thus resulting in a net-zero change of state, given the button was released at the last update and is still released at this update), the input backend is expected to queue up the events so they may be delivered to the handler in the order in which they occurred when `Update` is called **where possible**. The events being in order is preferred and strongly recommended for backend implementations, and if a backend is able to order events in this way it is required to do so and required to do so consistently. If the backend is unable to do so, then the events being in order is not required. 

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** Some backends, such as OpenXR, may only operate on a state query basis, and obviously we only query the state when `Update` is called. This is the reason why it's only a "where possible" requirement, because if we can't actually get the events in the order they happened from the underlying backend (like we can for GLFW, for example) then it's impossible for us to convey this up to the developer. However, regardless of backend-specifics, a `State` update must always be paired with an handler method call.

The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other handler interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the handler, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `handler` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `handler` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered.
```

{
    public Mice Mice { get; }
    public Keyboards Keyboards { get; }
    public Gamepads Gamepads { get; }
    public Joysticks Joysticks { get; }
    public IReadOnlyList<IInputDevice> Devices { get; }
    public IList<IInputBackend> Backends { get; }
    public event Action<ConnectionEvent>? ConnectionChanged;
    public void Update();
}
```

The central input object acts as the main entry point into the Input API, and is responsible for comparing the state reported by the devices for differences between `Update` calls (raising events as necessary). 

`Mice`, `Keyboards`, `Gamepads`, and `Joysticks` are all custom `IReadOnlyList` types for enumerating the **state** (given that the actual input objects are thin, and the state contains a reference to the original device anyway). However, these custom types also contain the events. This is so we can "scope" the events, rather than putting them at the top-level and having to call the events `MouseButtonDown`, `JoystickButtonDown`, etc.

By virtue of the `State` properties not updating until `IInputBackend.Update` is called, the states enumerated by the lists will not change until `Update` is called.

> `Update` will call `IInputBackend.Update` on each of the `Backends`, passing in an actor which implements `IInputHandler`, `IMouseInputHandler`, `IKeyboardInputHandler`, `IGamepadInputHandler`, and `IJoystickInputHandler` with each of the methods invoking a matching event defined in "Custom List Types".

Author: ```suggestion
`Update` will call `IInputBackend.Update` on each of the `Backends`, passing in a handler which implements `IInputHandler`, `IMouseInputHandler`, `IKeyboardInputHandler`, `IGamepadInputHandler`, and `IJoystickInputHandler` with each of the methods invoking a matching event defined in "Custom List Types".
```

{
    public MouseClickConfiguration ClickConfiguration { get; set; }
    public event Action<MouseDownEvent>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<MouseUpEvent>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<MouseClickEvent>? Click;
    public event Action<MouseClickEvent>? DoubleClick;
    public event Action<MouseMoveEvent>? CursorMove;
    public event Action<MouseScrollEvent>? Scroll;
}

public partial class Keyboards : IReadOnlyList<IKeyboard>
{
    public event Action<KeyDownEvent>? KeyDown;
    public event Action<KeyUpEvent>? KeyUp;
    public event Action<KeyTextEvent>? TextInput;
}

public partial class Gamepads : IReadOnlyList<IGamepad>
{
    public event Action<GamepadDownEvent>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<GamepadUpEvent>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<GamepadThumbstickMoveEvent>? ThumbstickMove;
    public event Action<GamepadTriggerMoveEvent>? TriggerMove;
}

public partial class Joysticks : IReadOnlyList<IJoystick>
{
    public event Action<JoystickDownEvent>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<JoystickUpEvent>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<JoystickAxisMoveEvent>? AxisMove;
    public event Action<JoystickHatMoveEvent>? HatMove;
}
```

> All events will be raised when their matching actor methods are called, with the exception of `Click` and `DoubleClick` which are implemented on top of `ButtonDown` and `ButtonUp` respectively (as in 2.X).

Author: ```suggestion
All events will be raised when their matching handler methods are called, with the exception of `Click` and `DoubleClick` which are implemented on top of `ButtonDown` and `ButtonUp` respectively (as in 2.X).
```

`MouseClickConfiguration` is defined as follows:

```cs
public record struct MouseClickConfiguration(int DoubleClickTime, float DoubleClickRange);
```

This will be configurable on `Mice` (i.e. via `InputContext.Mice.ClickConfiguration`). The Silk.NET team wishes to reserve the right to define the initial values set on `Mice.ClickConfiguration`, but these will most likely be the same as in 2.X.

Unlike 1.0 and 2.0, this proposal uses `readonly record struct`s as their only argument for the event action. This allows us to provide more information to the event handlers without breaking in the future. These types are farily simple:

```cs
public readonly record struct ConnectionEvent(IInputDevice Device, bool IsConnected);
public readonly record struct KeyDownEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key, bool IsRepeat);
public readonly record struct KeyUpEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key);
public readonly record struct KeyCharEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, char Character, int Scancode);

> public readonly record struct KeyTextEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, string? Text);

Author: ```suggestion
```

`SetPosition` allows moving the mouse cursor without the end user physically moving their mouse. Please note that this does not immediately update `State` with the new value - the changes will be reflected next time `IInputBackend.Update` is called.

The device state returned by `State` fills out the following structure:

```cs
public readonly record struct MouseState
(
    MouseButtonState Buttons,
    Vector2 Position,
    Vector2 WheelPosition
);
```

`MouseButtonState` is defined as:
```cs
public readonly record struct MouseButtonState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Down
)
{
    public bool this[MouseButton btn] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<MouseButton> Up { get; }
}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular button is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the button state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set.

> Changes to `MouseState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).

Author: ```suggestion
Changes to `MouseState` also have matching handler methods which are subject to the handler method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).
```

(
    string? Text,
    KeyState Keys
);
```

`Text` contains the text typed on the keyboard since `IKeyboard.BeginInput`. This is cleared (set to `null`) when `IKeyboard.EndInput` is called, and will not be non-`null` again until another `IKeyboard.BeginInput` call.

```cs
public readonly record struct KeyState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<Key> Down
)
{
    public bool this[KeyName btn] { get; }
    public bool this[int scancode] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<Key> Up { get; }
}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular key is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the key state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set. Scancode-only keys will not be present in `Up`.

Note because not all keys are named, and because some developers may prefer to use scancodes instead, a `Key` struct is used instead of just having the list be a list of key names.

```cs
public readonly record struct Key(KeyName Name, int Scancode);
```

`KeyName` will be `Unknown` for scancode-only, unnamed keys.

> Changes to `KeyboardState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).

Author: ```suggestion
Changes to `KeyboardState` also have matching handler methods which are subject to the handler method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).
```

```cs
public interface IKeyboardInputHandler : IInputHandler
{
    void HandleKeyDown(KeyDownEvent @event);
    void HandleKeyUp(KeyUpEvent @event);
    void HandleKeyChar(KeyCharEvent @event);
}
```

`HandleKeyDown` must be called when a `Key` is added to the `KeyState.Down` list.

`HandleKeyUp` must be called when a `Key` is removed from the `KeyState.Down` list.

> `HandleTextInput` must be called when `KeyboardState.Text` changes.

Author: ```suggestion
`HandleKeyChar` must be called when a character is added to `KeyboardState.Text`.
```

`GamepadState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public readonly record struct GamepadState
(
    JoystickButtonState Buttons,
    DualReadOnlyList<Vector2> Thumbsticks,
    DualReadOnlyList<float> Triggers,
    IReadOnlyList<IMotor> VibrationMotors
);
```

`GamepadState` reuses a lot of the joystick API types, which are defined later in this proposal.

`Thumbsticks` contain the two thumbsticks on this gamepad. The X and Y values within this list range from -1 to 1: -1 being leftmost, and 1 being rightmost.

`Triggers` contains the two triggers on thsi gamepad. The values within this list range from 0 to 1: 0 being unpressed, and 1 being fully pressed.

Note the use of the `DualReadOnlyList` type. This is basically just:
```cs
public readonly struct DualReadOnlyList<T> : IReadOnlyList<T>
{
    public readonly T E0;
    public readonly T E1;
}
```

This is used where the list will only ever have exactly two elements, mainly because the "gamepad" form factor is standard and it doesn't make sense to have multiple thumbsticks or triggers given a human only has two thumbs or index fingers. More exotic devices should be exposed using the joystick API.

> Changes to `GamepadState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).

Author: ```suggestion
Changes to `GamepadState` also have matching handler methods which are subject to the handler method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).
```

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** The only difference is `Hats` is now a `Vector2` instead of a `Position2D`. It is still intended that the X and Y values are only ever `0` or `1`, but this is not a requirement for more exotic backends.

`JoystickButtonState` is defined as follows:
```cs
public readonly record struct JoystickButtonState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<JoystickButton> Down
)
{
    public bool this[JoystickButton btn] { get; }
    public InputReadOnlyList<JoystickButton> Up { get; }
}
```

The indexer returns `true` if a particular button is pressed, false otherwise. If the developer wishes to enumerate the button state, they must explicitly enumerate through even the `Down` buttons or `Up` buttons.

`Up` and the indexer will be implemented in terms of `Down`, which is the only property that a backend will need to set.

`JoystickButton` is defined as follows:
```cs
public enum JoystickButton
{
    Unknown,
    A,
    B,
    X,
    Y,
    LeftBumper,
    RightBumper,
    Back,
    Start,
    Home,
    LeftStick,
    RightStick,
    DPadUp,
    DPadRight,
    DPadDown,
    DPadLeft
}
```

> Changes to `JoystickState` also have matching actor methods which are subject to the actor method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).

Author: ```suggestion
Changes to `JoystickState` also have matching handler methods which are subject to the handler method rules i.e. the backend should call them in the order in which the backend received the events where possible etc (read the Input Handlers section).
```

Some users will want to receive events in the order that they happen. Observing state does not allow us to do this if, for instance, a button was pressed and released between update calls - the state would have a net-zero change and thus we wouldn't be able to detect such events.

This is solved by the actor model, which is implemented by the custom list types - the actor methods invoking the matching events.

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** A possible question is "why don't we just expose the events directly on the devices? Why do we need this actor model?". The answer to that is having events on the devices has considerations for the lifetime of the device objects, which the Silk.NET team wishes to leave unrestricted. For instance, when a device connects the input context will need to bind the events on each device itself and when a device disconnects the behaviour thereafter would be undefined because we have not explicitly allowed or disallowed the reuse of device objects, and we do not wish to. If a device object were to be reused when the device reconnects, those events would still be there. It's better to encapsulate these events in their own object using this actor model.

```cs

> public interface IActor

Reviewer 2: Naming: I dislike actor as name, I think its generally associated with the actor pattern/model (distributed computing, think Orleans) and ´IActor´ is bound to collide with someone

Author: Hmmm. `IInputReceiver`? `IInputListener`? Thoughts on an alternative name?

Reviewer: `IInputHandler` might make more sense if the methods it defines also say "handler"

{
    void HandleDeviceConnectionChanged(ConnectionEvent<IInputDevice> @event);
}
```

The base `IActor` is simple, handling only device connections and device disconnections.

`HandleDeviceConnectionChanged` must be called with a device and a value of `true` if the `ConnectionEvent.Device` has just been added to the `IInputBackend.Devices` list.

`HandleDeviceConnectionChanged` must be called with a device and a value of `false` if the `ConnectionEvent.Device` has just been removed from the `IInputBackend.Devices` list.

> All actor methods are called in the order that the state changes happened in the underlying backend. For example, a "double click" would be mouse down, mouse up, mouse down, and mouse up again. Even if those events happened entirely between two update calls (thus resulting in a net-zero change of state, given the button was released at the last update and is still released at this update), the input backend is expected to queue up the events so they may be delivered to the actor in the order in which they occurred when `Update` is called **where possible**.

Reviewer 2: clarification: *ordering* is optional but preferred, but consistency (raising the events at all) is required.

Reviewer: Should ordering be optional on things like mouse button ups/downs though? Or should ordering be straight up required as to properly catch things like quickly shift-clicking?

Author: Yeah straight up required where the backend is able to provide it (will implement Kai's clarification)

The `IActor` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other actor interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseActor` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the actor, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `actor` is an instance of `IMouseActor`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `actor` does not implement `IMouseActor`, no mouse events will be delivered.

Note that during the `Update` call, a backend must only update the device's state in the order that the events are delivered. For example when `IInputBackend.Update` is called:
1. The backend has a queued "mouse down" event.
2. The backend updates the `State` of the relevant `IMouse` for that button press.
3. The backend calls `HandleButtonDown` on the `IMouseActor` (if applicable).
4. The backend has a queued "mouse up" event.
5. The backend updates the `State` of the relevant `IMouse` for that button release.

> 6. The backend calls `HandleButtonUp` on the `IMouseActor` (if applicable).

Reviewer: As of 2.X, input events can occur in between updates (I just tried mouse events with an update rate of 1 per second) which pretty much ensures as good as GLFW can that on button callbacks you get the position of the mouse where the event occur, so this is important if we want if we want to be able to keep that ability of processing the button event at the position it occurred, not at the position the mouse was when the event was finally handled

Author: If I understand correctly you're asking "can we get the position of the down/up?" which is resolved by the move and down/up events being sent in order i.e. you'll move your cursor then you'll get a down then an up. This is just an example for just the down/up events - the events will continue to function as in 2.X today and the state will reflect the order in which the events are sent.

Reviewer: Yes (I commented that just to make sure we're on the same page)

Author: Awesome, thanks :D

**INFORMATIVE TEXT:** Some backends, such as OpenXR, may only operate on a state query basis, and obviously we only query the state when `Update` is called. This is the reason why it's only a "where possible" requirement, because if we can't actually get the events in the order they happened from the underlying backend (like we can for GLFW, for example) then it's impossible for us to convey this up to the developer. However, regardless of backend-specifics, a `State` update must always be paired with an actor method call.

> The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other actor interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the actor, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `actor` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `actor` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered.

Reviewer: We should probably add that any events that could be raised by an interface that is not implemented by the handler should be discarded on `Update()`, to make sure we aren't leaving open the possibility of a managed memory leak

Author: ```suggestion
The `IInputHandler` passed into `Update` may implement multiple other actor interfaces (as defined below), and if the actor implements an extra interface (such as `IMouseInputHandler` defined below) that would allow the backend to forward more events to the actor, the backend must do so via type checking. That is, if `actor` is an instance of `IMouseInputHandler`, any mouse events are delivered to that actor. But if `actor` does not implement `IMouseInputHandler`, no mouse events will be delivered. All events, including those that were not delivered due to the actor not implementing a necessary interface, must be discarded at the end of the `Update` call.
```

public partial class Mice : IReadOnlyList<IMouse>
{
    public MouseClickConfiguration ClickConfiguration { get; set; }
    public event Action<MouseDownEvent>? ButtonDown;
    public event Action<MouseUpEvent>? ButtonUp;
    public event Action<MouseClickEvent>? Click;
    public event Action<MouseClickEvent>? DoubleClick;
    public event Action<MouseMoveEvent>? CursorMove;
    public event Action<MouseScrollEvent>? Scroll;
}

public partial class Keyboards : IReadOnlyList<IKeyboard>
{
    public event Action<KeyDownEvent>? KeyDown;
    public event Action<KeyUpEvent>? KeyUp;

>     public event Action<KeyTextEvent>? TextInput;

Reviewer: I still believe we should expose `KeyChar` that works like in 2.X. Specially now with the `IInputHandler` model it wouldn't make sense to keep this unless we added logic to make sure all the `HandleKeyChar()`-s  are merged into a single `TextInput` event.

What if for example, someone wants to make a typing game? Handling text input like this makes it easier for the specific case in which the user doesn't need to filter chars and _needs_ it to be a string (for my text input UI, I always have a `StringBuilder` or something more performant) but makes every other use case harder

Author: Removing the text input event to ensure the events match their handlers, but if they want the full text it will still be available on the state if within BeginInput/EndInput calls.

```suggestion
    public event Action<KeyCharEvent>? KeyChar;
```

}
```

All events will be raised when their matching actor methods are called, with the exception of `Click` and `DoubleClick` which are implemented on top of `ButtonDown` and `ButtonUp` respectively (as in 2.X).

> `DoubleClick` will be raised if `Mice.ButtonDown` is raised two consecutive times within `MouseClickConfiguration.DoubleClickTime` milliseconds, and the `MouseState.Position`'s `X` or `Y` did not change more than `MouseClickConfiguration.DoubleClickRange` between the two events. If these conditions are not met, `Click` is raised instead.

Reviewer: Does `Click` have a time or range limit too, or will a hold-move-release trigger it?

Author: Hold-move-release won't register as a click the movement delta is within `MouseClickConfiguration.DoubleClickRange`. That being said, I was intending to copy and paste the 2.X implementation given how much work @Pyrdacor put into it so do have a play around with the click events in 2.X if you're curious.

Reviewer: Maybe we should clarify this in the proposal? We could just say we'll keep their behavior as it is in 2.X.

Playing around with Windows 10's UI it doesn't seem like clicking has a time limit so scrap that

Author: Yep, I'll clarify in half an hour or so - just got back from the office and want to chill with a tea for a bit. Unless you're not around this evening? Then I'll do it now!

Reviewer 3: A click is basically a mouse down which is not part of a double-click. So no matter for what reason a double-click "failed", the click event is raised. In general you will subscribe to a click event only if you want to distinguish it from a double-click. Otherwise just use mouse down. So these events are only useful if you implement click and double-click on the same target.

Author: Clarified.

Unlike 1.0 and 2.0, this proposal uses `readonly record struct`s as their only argument for the event action. This allows us to provide more information to the event handlers without breaking in the future. These types are farily simple:

```cs
public readonly record struct ConnectionEvent(IInputDevice Device, bool IsConnected);
public readonly record struct KeyDownEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key, bool IsRepeat);
public readonly record struct KeyUpEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key);

> public readonly record struct KeyCharEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, char Character, int Scancode);

Reviewer: Looking [at the GLFW input guide](https://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/input_guide.html) it seems `KeyChar` events don't have a scancode, but rather just a "codepoint" (the `char`). KeyDown and KeyUp however do have a scancode.

Reviewer: And in 2.X we also have it like this:

```cs
event Action<IKeyboard, Key, int>? KeyDown;
event Action<IKeyboard, Key, int>? KeyUp;
event Action<IKeyboard, char>? KeyChar;
```

Author: ```suggestion
public readonly record struct KeyDownEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key, bool IsRepeat);
public readonly record struct KeyUpEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, Key Key);
public readonly record struct KeyCharEvent(IKeyboard Keyboard, char Character);
```

```cs
public readonly record struct KeyboardState
(
    InputReadOnlyList<char>? Text,
    KeyState Keys
);
```

`Text` contains the characters typed on the keyboard since `IKeyboard.BeginInput`, and accounts for backspaces. This is cleared (set to `null`) when `IKeyboard.EndInput` is called, and will not be non-`null` again until another `IKeyboard.BeginInput` call. Given that `KeyChar` events are raised one character at a time, this property will update one character at a time to keep the state consistent with the event.

> **INFORMATIVE TEXT:** This is something we can optimize in `InputList` to not be allocatey, rest assured it is not acceptable to the Silk.NET team to allocate a new list for every character.

Reviewer: Quick question, the idea here is to do something like allocating a single chunk of memory, so all `KeyboardState.Text` have the same "pointer" to it but see it with different length?

Author: Yes that is what we're alluding to in this informative text.
